---
layout: page
title: Notes for pre-recorded lectures
---

<script type="text/javascript" async src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.5/latest.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML" async></script>

<!-- MarkdownTOC autolink="true" -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Philosophical Thinking and the Branches of Philosophy](#philosophical-thinking-and-the-branches-of-philosophy)
- [Metaphysics](#metaphysics)
- [Thales](#thales)
- [Pythagoras](#pythagoras)
- [The Socratic Period](#the-socratic-period)
- [Socrates and the Socratic School](#socrates-and-the-socratic-school)
- [The Socratic Method](#the-socratic-method)
- [Virtue is Knowledge](#virtue-is-knowledge)
- [Plato - Theory of Ideas](#plato---theory-of-ideas)
- [Plato - Epistemology and Metaphysics](#plato---epistemology-and-metaphysics)
- [Plato - Psychology and Ethics](#plato---psychology-and-ethics)
- [Aristotle - Psychology and Ethics \(1\)](#aristotle---psychology-and-ethics-1)
- [Aristotle - Psychology and Ethics \(2\)](#aristotle---psychology-and-ethics-2)
- [Aristotle - Psychology and Ethics \(3\)](#aristotle---psychology-and-ethics-3)

<!-- /MarkdownTOC -->


## Introduction

Philosophy is a foundational discipline, which is literally translated to "love of knowledge".    
It is the study of the fundamental nature of knowledge, reality, and existence. In the past, nearly everything fell under this umbrella, so nearly all academics were said to be philosophers.
It is a humanistic discipline that investigates the nature of values, and tries to understand how we (humanity) are connected to the world and reality in general.    
Once we have this definition, we would like to argue as to why it is reasonable.    
As a discipline, what does philosophy do? Philosophers not only question themselves, but also the views of other sources of knowledge.    
To understand these various perspectives, we need to understand the development of philosophy, by studying the works of the generations of philosophers before us.

All knowledge systems develop from human thinking. Philosophical thinking has the same roots -- speculation on the nature of existence. One might wonder: How has reality come into existence? What is existence? Does this existence have any meaning? Is death the end?

Nagel says that philosophy is fundamentally different from science and mathematics -- unlike the former, it does not rely experiments and observations and unlike the latter, it has no formal methods of proof. It is conducted merely by asking questions, arguing and trying out ideas and possible arguments against them.

## Philosophical Thinking and the Branches of Philosophy

The thought process of philosophy also extends to ways of thought in other disciplines such as mathematics and astronomy.

Philosophical investigation is conceptual in nature. We think through concepts and the effort is towards making sense of experience and ideas concerning the subject matter. What is justice? What is truth? What is an argument?    
There are several ways to think philosophically:
* Speculatively: Philosophy began with speculative thinking. We aim to know the ultimate principle that constitutes reality. Knowledge here is based on not only experience, but to intuitive insights that go beyond the experience of observable facts. It highlights the power of imagination in visualizing something. For example, what are element constituted of (Thales claimed that everything is made of water).
* Imaginatively/creatively: Imagination is the spirit of discovery and invention of new ideas. It is not about what is, but rather what can be. Philosophical thinking is inherently creative. Tagore thinks that truth is intimately related to human life and depends on it.
* Reflectively/critically/meditatively: This involves the objective analysis of thoughts and evaluation of information. We attempt to assess the accuracy, consistency, and relevance of an idea (after all, the goal of any philosophical idea is to make it relevant to humanity as a whole). This is done through skillful application of concepts.
* Argumentatively: We try to logically experiment with thoughts in philosophy. These arguments are regulated by logic (laws of thought), which takes us from one set of thoughts to another.
* Liberally/inclusively: While argumentativeness is important, we must not let ourselves be overwhelmed by it. If we are not open-minded and receptive to new perspectives, certain ideas will become dominant and we become 'philosophically blind'. We must scrutinize ourselves to eiminate prejudices and dogmas.

## Metaphysics

Metaphysics is at the center of philosophical thinking. It raises fundamental questions about the universe and one's existence. Why do we exist? What is existence?

It studies the causes that are the basis of everything that exists or doesn't. It can be called the "first principles" of philosophy and deals with the ultimate nature of the universe. It is also referred to as "the origin of all sciences".

During the Renaissance in the 17th century, philosophers of enlightenment disrupted the flow of metaphysical thinking. Later, the logical positivists claimed that metaphysics is 'philosophical nonsense', which led to a scornful attitude against it.

We begin with Aristotle, who authored _ta meta ta physika_, the _Treatise on Metaphysics_. He broadly divided metaphysics into three categories:
* Ontology, which deals with the general nature of everything. Aristotle describes it as the study of _being qua being_. The latin word 'qua' means 'in so far as'. So, Aristotle's text deals with the study of being, or rather, of beings -- of things that can be said to be.
* Theology, which deals with the highest kind of being, that he appropriates to a "God" or divinity.
* Universal science, which talks about things that are true of anything that exists, and lies at the basis of all proof and demonstration.

Does the existence of science nullify metaphysics, as the logical positivists claim? While this is a subjective question, we believe otherwise. The technical vocabularies of different disciplines are different, so they must have different perspectives as a result. To resolve this, we required an interdisciplinary integration of perspectives, which is where metaphysics steps into the picture.

## Thales

Thales (624-546 BCE) is the first known philosopher. He is the founder the Ionian school of science.    
Philosophy in this era was formed by critical reasoning bursting into an arena dominated by religion and mythical wisdom, and perhaps this wisdom was its source. The Greeks believed in God and the power of the oracle, and Thales was the first one to articulate his thoughts, setting aside religion and myths.

He came up with a principle of movement (changes in nature) that is fundamental to order. He encouraged people to be aware and not be deceived by appearances, staying attentive to understand how things really are.    
He encouraged questioning of the existing system of knowledge, and the possible frameworks of misunderstanding. This led to a desire to learn the truth about things as they are, and not how they appear. He also asked how things exist independently of whether we observe them. Indeed, Thales is said to be the first to think of cause and effect.

Thales' basic principle was that everything is water. Water has no shape and no form on its own, it takes the shape of things around it, and is vital and necessary for nourishment and growth. This belief that everything is made of a single substance is scientifically naive, but he attempted to conclude something meaningful from his observations.

Thales spoke only 'metaphorically' that he was trying to communicate in a way understandable to the common people. Communicating in this way definitely misses the point -- the first philosophers are trying to communicate some profound truth to others, but also that no-one has a monopoly on the truth.    
He is also the first thinker from whom we have gained insights about nature, geometry, astronomical and meteorological interests, and he is even said to have opined on problems such as causes of earthquakes and overflows of the Nile.

## Pythagoras

Pythagoras (572-497 BCE) attempted to combine mysticism and mathematics, which tend to be polar opposites of each other.

Mysticism was the primary grounds of religious belief for his followers, and this mysticism was expressed by music (in fact, he invented the western musical scale and a stringed instrument). He contemplated how people in society could be philosophically enlightened. He believed numbers could be used to explain musical harmony.

Unlike Thales who believed everything was water, Pythagoras' view was that numbers can represents everything in nature, despite being intangible. Mathematics maintains a 'demonstrative' deductive knowledge and indeed, Pythagoras believed that truth has a demonstrative component to it.    
Pythagoreans were faschinated by this form of the world, and they seeked measure, order, propositions, and uniformity, which can all be expressed via numbers. Numbers were not seen as being the actual substance of things (like water for Thales), but rather as constituting objects' formal or relational structure.

Pythagoras believed that mathematical thinking would assist in not only expressing ideas, but also 'purification' of thoughts. Directive arguments began with Pythagoras, which talk about self-evident ideas -- for example that two distinct points determine a line. _Axioms_ are self-evident fundamental propositions. The axiomatic method performs step-wise deduction through the application of rules, thus deriving new propositions from the axioms. In the deductive mathematical argument, the conclusion is intuitively obvious.

## The Socratic Period

During the Greek era, history, poetry, and medicine were considered important in addition to philosophy. The dominating view was a naive theory full of gods and mystical powers. Critical thinking was primarily towards the origin and purpose of the state, the principle of conduct, the status of religion, art and education, and rules.    
This age of development is called the period of _Greek enlightenment_. It fostered the spirit of independent reflection and criticism. Individualism was a primary focus, and people were encouraged to pursue their interests. This led to a departure from speculative thought in favour of critical thinking. It was a shift from nation-centric philosophy to man-centric philosophy.

Man's place was determined by the conclusion reached by metaphysics, and after the Great Persian War and an influx of wealth and success in Athens, there were massive changes in the political, economic, and intellectual landscapes.

The arrival of Socrates was accompanied with intellectualism/subjectivism and skepticism. People were looking for justification, and this was offered by Socrates.    
The representatives of this new movement were known as _sophists_ (derived from _sophia_, which means 'wisdom'). They were wise and skilful, and trained people in dialectics, grammar, rhetoric, and oratory skills. These skills became a practical necessity at this point.

The Oracle was considered God, and predicted the future (Apollo). The Oracle of Delphi is very relevant in conversations during this era.    
Rhetoric is the flow of speech (before the state or public).    
Dialectic is a form of argumentative reasoning involving frequently asking questions and seeking answers. It begins with the question "What is justice?".    
In dialectical interrogation, the questioner attempts to lead the responder to a contradiction -- this is known as _Aporia_.

## Socrates and the Socratic School

Socrates (469-399 BCE) changed the nature of philosophy. He believed that man is an important factor in the process of knowing. While the Sophists were competent in attaining truth with all their critical acumen, they had overlooked the criticism of intellect itself.    
There was a dichotomy between the ethical and the epistemological in the past, and Socrates believed that they must be united in regards to knowing the truth. Morality was viewed as a convention and had nothing to do with one's beliefs as a rational being. This led to a birth of radical skepticism when people started doubting what they had accepted to be true in the past.    
The fault in sophistry lies in that while reflection and criticism were indispensable, they did not use it in a constructive way and people began to accept their teachings as truth without thinking about it themselves. This is where Socrates enters the picture.

Socrates tried to bring order to the intellectual and moral chaos of the age, and frequently served as a moderator between staunch conservatives and liberals. He took up a divine vocation to examine himself by questioning others.    
He believed that any individual must investigate themselves with conviction and without any biases. Towards this, he believed that "an unexamined life is not worth living". He expressed courage in politics and war and believed that anyone must act with self-control, dignity, and perseverance.

## The Socratic Method

Socrates found that most ideas were creating confusion in both politics and ethics, and clarifying this was his primarily hurdle in overthrowing the dominant sophistry. He encouraged that opinions must not be accepted blindly since they could be misleading.    
To do this, he used a method of cross-examination, which is now dubbed as the 'Socratic method'. He initiated a conversation/dialogue and tested an opinion by means of an illustration from everyday life. Through skillful questioning, he was able to test the validity of arguments -- both his and the sophists'.

The foundation of his method involved
* (Lower) skepticism: One must express intellectual humility and demonstrate ignorance of the truth of the matter under discussion. While the sophists' skepticism was definite, that of Socrates was provisional -- the goal of the conversation is the truth, but the sophists believed that it wasn't possible to ever arrive at it.
* Dialogue: He had the ulterior motive of discovering the truth. To do this, he questioned the popular traditional sources and figure out their origins.
* Concepts/Definitions: The truth is embedded in the correct definition, and this is the goal of knowledge.
* Inductive/empirical arguments: He often referred to particular instances/occurrences to argue, pointing to things in the past which people accepted/rejected. It was neither completely theoretical nor completely practical.
* Deductive arguments: He used to test the consequences of evidence, thus testing the validity of propositions. It involves criticizing statements assuming that a particular basic definition is correct.

An example of his method is a conversation with Euthydemus: "Must a man be a just man in order to be in politics?" To answer this, one must understand what "just" means. He tried to classify actions as just or unjust -- what about cheating, stealing, enslaving, and falsehood? At first glance, they seem to be unjust, but what if a general strategises and 'cheats' in a war or lies to boost his troops' morale? Is this still unjust? On the other hand, cheating friends is unjust. Who is a cheat? One who is voluntarily doing it or one who is involuntarily doing it? He used induction to come up with a provisional definition, then deduction to test it with other examples. The final aim is to discover the core characteristics of the subject to be defined.    
Through such a dialogue, he tried to illicit the truth and change the way of thinking of the Athenians.

## Virtue is Knowledge

Socrates had faith in knowledge, and believed that it along with virtue are necessary for society. He attempted to practice ethical ideas and discover rational principles for right and wrong actions. This was done in his pursuit to improve the soul and set a moral order to society as a whole.    
He thought that knowledge is the highest good, and right thinking is necessary to perform a right action. Everyone must understand morality, since moral knowledge is required to resolve social conflicts and establish a just society.

He also equated knowledge and virtue. To make a change in our life, all we need is knowledge -- it is both necessary and sufficient to be virtuous. Virtue and true happiness (happiness that is eternal) are identical, and a happy man is he who is temperate, brave, wise, and just. By doing this, he also establishes a distinction between pleasure and happiness; the former is related to the body while the latter is related to the soul.    
Thus, knowledge is primarily for the improvement of one's souls and not one's properties. This knowledge mustn't be fallible. Increasing knowledge brings us closer to virtue. Socrates questioned existing beliefs, and encouraged people to ponder for themselves what is worth following. He was not very skeptical, and was very optimistic and progressive.

A teacher can transmit knowledge, but Socrates believed that virtue cannot be taught. They must be practiced and discovered on one's own. He encouraged people to think about whether their actions were helping them improve as a person. The role of the wise is to cure social ills.    
The problem with the Athenians was that they were not ready to accept and evaluate themselves. As a result, they were not concerned with human improvement and failed to see the importance of criticism. Such an open society does not come into being overnight, it comes about slowly through the establishment of critical tradition. We must have institutions that protect critics, and society must make space for them. The fact that Athens was not such a society is evident from the way Socrates died -- he was sentenced to death via hemlock poisoning for corrupting the minds of the youth. Rather than backing away and fleeing, he accepted this judgment and ingested the poison willingly.

## Plato - Theory of Ideas

Plato (427-347 BCE) was a follower of Socrates, and is one of the most important philosophers of the Socratic period. His comprehensive ideas, created by drawing insights from Socrates and other philosophers, relate epistemology, philosophy, and ethics (human knowledge, existence, and conduct).

He believed that genuine/true knowledge is eternal and absolute (this was inspired b Parmenides' ideas). Experiences related to sense are not eternal, so do not constitute true knowledge. He emphasised that the real can be comprehended through reason.    
By doing this, Plato also claims that we must not judge objects based on their appearance, since that need not be indicative of reality. For sophists, opinions and knowledge are nearly the same, but this is not the case in Plato's philosophy. He encourages conceptual thinking, clarity, and precision.

The dialectical method consists of generalization (the comprehension of scattered particulars into one idea) and classification/particularization (the division of the idea into species). Thus, the dialectic consists of thinking and synthesis of concepts, not sensations or images. By doing this, he also tried to show that the sophists' thinking was inconsistent.

Plato's originality lies in the fact that he raised universals. Objects are similar because they partake of similarity. Particulars are copies of these universals. For example, different breeds of horses all partake in the property of 'horseness'. Beautiful objects all partake of beauty.	

Now, let us compare the ideas of Parmenides and Plato regarding what an idea is.    
According to Parmenides, an idea is not a thought. There is only one idea, and ideas are not known to us because human knowledge is not absolute.    
According to Plato on the other hand, an idea may be an object of a thought -- merely things that partake of particulars. There are multiple indivisible ideas. These can be grasped using reason, and he compared the soul to these ideas. The subject matter of his epistemology was figuring out this classification of ideas. Ideas correspond to abstract thoughts that participate in particulars. For example, one can see a horse but not 'horseness'. They are non-temporal in nature and exist in an independent realm.

## Plato - Epistemology and Metaphysics

In Plato's philosophy, epistemology and metaphysics were integrated. He believed that the soul is akin to the form in some sense, so the soul can contemplate the pure eternal ideas. Knowledge is latent in one's soul.    
'Goodness' is placed at the highest level and is something of a unifying form. The idea of goodness is known as _Logos_ -- the principle of divine reason and cosmic order. The meaning of goodness cannot be grasped by the senses. Having an opinion about goodness is possible through observation of good actions, but knowledge of it is only possible throgh contemplation. Rational thinking (conceptual knowledge), and not experience, is the source of knowledge, which is the thread between thought and reality.

The truth of mathematics and the ideas of beauty, truth, and goodness, are real and exist independently. If the objects of our ideas are not real, our knowledge wouldn't be genuine knowledge.    
Genuine knowledge is that about forms, which is infallible. Objects of sensuous experience are subject to change, which is the reason they are not infallible. Knowledge must be about something that _is_ and isn't _becoming_. Protagoras and Heraclitus believed that all things are in the process of becoming, which further explains why sensuous experiences are fallible.    
This change validates relative knowledge. Russell says that one judgement cannot be truer than another. It may be better, however, in the sense of having better consequences, which suggests pragmatism.

## Plato - Psychology and Ethics

Psychology is the study of human behaviour and the cause of behaviour. Ethics is about how one performs a 'good' action -- what is the meaning of goodness and what is a good life?

Plato's ethics, like his theory of knowledge, is based on his metaphysics. Plato admits the pre-existence and immortality of the soul (it exists even without the body). He compares the body-soul relation to that of a chariot and charioteer. We cannot see the soul, but it is what controls the body.    
There is a tripartite relation between _reason_ (the rational part of the spirit), _spirit_ (the irrational part -- the spirited part has nobler impulses such as anger, ambition, and love of power), and _appetite_ (the lower appetites and passion).    
Corresponding to each of the above, there are three faculties through which the soul acts: the rational faculty (intellectual activities), the spirited faculty (the will faculty/faculty of decision), and the appetitive faculty (desire for food and pleasure of wealth).    
There are two types of pleasure: pleasure of senses and the intellectual pleasure of reason. He also talks about _psychological relativity_, which is a neutral state between pleasure and pain.     

Desire is a hindrance to the ethical supremacy of reason. These are not only irrational, but also pleasure-centric, and the ultimate goal of any man is not pleasure, but happiness. To understand the epistemic content of good actions is an important component of Plato's philosophy. One must have self-knowledge to make good decisions. Moral perfection can only be attained if we have control over our spirit and desire.

According to Plato, a just man is a happy man. A life of reason or virtue is the highest good. The soul must exercise its power to realize the virtue of wisdom, courage, temperance, and justice. Pleasure results from gratification of desire, and the more reasonable the desire, the more pleasurable its gratification. We must carefully choose which desires are worth pursuing, namely intellectual ones and not sensuous ones.    
Thus, we see that Plato gave great importance to the rational element of the soul. This demonstrates the ascetic tone of Greek philosophers who consider the world to have a transitive existence, wherein the material body represents imperfection. Perfection lies in the power of contemplation of the power of truth.

## Aristotle - Psychology and Ethics (1)

Next, we study the philosophy of Aristotle.    
He proposed that the man is constituted of two parts, the _body_ and _soul_. The body and soul were related as matter and form -- the soul makes the body as an organic unit that allows it to interact with the world and gives it purpose. The soul allows the body to percieve, and is characterized by sensation, feeling, and motive.    
Based on this, he says that the soul has three layers: _rational_, _sensible_, and _nutritional_.    
He also says that the mind is different from the soul. The mind, which is immortal and timeless, can exist independent of substance and other psychic powers. it understands conceptual knowledge such as mathematics and philosophy, and represents one's power to think.

The nutritive and sensible functions of the soul are independently carried out. When it comes to the rational function of the soul, we try to see how reason enters the picture and how thoughts occur. <!-- Conceptual thought is actualized reason. -->    
Reason is of two types:
* _Active reason_ does not arise during a soul's development like the other psychic functions. It can be identified with universal reason or the mind of god, and is the divine mind coming to the soul from without. When we try to evaluate if a thought is just, we apply active reason.
* _Creative reason_ is absolutely immortal and is not bound to the body. Concepts are actualized using creative reason and thoughts and essences become one.

## Aristotle - Psychology and Ethics (2)

Aristotle gave a comprehensive scientific theory of morality. In ethics, he aimed to answer the Socratic question of a 'highest good' in the form of _eudaimonia_. According to Aristotle, every good action done deliberately by a person brings them closer to the highest good of eudaimonia. The goodness of a thing consists in the realization of its nature, the need of a creature to realize and manifest its essence, which distinguishes it from every other creature. Pleasure accompanies virtuous activities as a secondary effect. It should be noted that pleasure is a consequence of highest good, but is not identical to it. We must balance reason, feeling, and desire.    
Virtue is of two types:
* _Intellectual virtue_: This includes the virtue of wisdom, quest for knowledge, or perfection in thinking conceptually and coherently.
* _Moral virtue_: This consists of emotional actions. To attain this, one must have emotional balance in the form of temperance, courage, and broadmindedness.

There is also a mention of _phronesis_, which is practical virtue.    
Aristotle defines virtue as moderation that aims for the mean of excess and deficiency; courage is the mean of foolhardiness and cowardice, liberality is the mean of extravagance and avarice, and modesty is the mean of bashfulness and shamelessness.    
However, this mean varies depending on the person and the circumstance. It is determined by reason, or as a right-minded person would determine it. Moral conduct must be decided by the virtuous man, who is the standard of things. Such a man must exhibit moral character and stable conduct.     
So, virtue is a disposition that involves deliberate choices consisting of a mean relative to ourselves, with the mean determined by either reason or a virtuous man.

## Aristotle - Psychology and Ethics (3)

Moral actions must be performed with both reason and virtue. One must transcend selfish individualism to attain self-realization. So, a moral altruistic person must promote the interests of others and service of his country, and must be a character of loving goodness for its own sake. To a virtuous person, a friend is a second self/an alter ego.

Justice is a virtue that implies a relation to others, for it promotes the interest of others irrespective of whether they are a ruler or a fellow citizen. A just society is one where duty, lawfulness, and fairness are given important. Laws should be pronounced for all subjects and the interest of a community as a whole. Thus, justice includes all other virtues.

The highest happiness is a speculative activity which takes the form of contemplation. A life of contemplation, is the most pleasant, self-sufficient, and intrinsically worthwhile way of life. Such a life may seem exalted for a human being, and man enjoys such a life not due to his humanity but due to some divine element in him. Knowledge of the nature of virtue is sufficient to ensure virtuous action. 